@subsubsection{Motivation}

@;{
For decades, Object-Oriented Programming (OOP) and Functional Programming (FP)
have been sold by various industrial and academic actors as antithetic
package deals of features, each supposed to be a programming panacea,
with communities refusing to acknowledge anything contribution from the other one,
even when slowly adopting features from the other side.
OOP, the dominant paradigm, was always presented in terms of as many different
complexes of features as there were rival languages,
its conceptual essence never clearly identified.
FP was previously used as an underlying platform on top of which various object systems
were built, advanced explained in terms of simpler ones
(e.g. visibility as scoping, row types for object subtyping, etc.).
However, it was never used to provide a clear elucidation of the essence of OOP,
reduced its minimal expression, as in the 109 characters above.
@; TODO: cite
}

In this paper we reconstitute a minimal model of OOP in FP using a constructive approach.
We unbundle the many features of either OOP and FP, to rebuild a minimal OOP core,
object prototypes, on top of a minimal FP language — the pure untyped lambda calculus.
We illustrate by example how our approach recognizably enables
the incremental definition of programs typical of OOP.
We provide a layered constructive bootstrapping of richer and more familiar object systems
from our minimal core, including objects as tables of field values, multiple inheritance.
We justify the use of lazy evaluation to achieve efficient sharing of computations
without necessitating side-effects.
We also explain how the familiar concepts of classes and mutable objects
can be layered on top of our construction.
The definitions included in this paper constitute a runnable Racket library,
the source code of the paper being its own self-testing software artifact.
We also built a production-quality object system based on the same concepts,
that we actually use in an industrial context.

@;{
Ultimately, the issue we address with this paper is social and philosophical,
though our solution takes the form of a technical demonstration.
We want to dispel the notion that FP and OO are opposite.
We want to unbundle the concepts traditionally associated to one or the other,
identify their essence, and show how they can be recombined in better, simpler ways.
Along the way, produce a modern OO system in about 80 lines of code,
that works in any modern language with higher-order functions and dynamic types or rich enough types.
}

